# Bachelor Thesis: Automatic Multi-Modal Detection of Autonomic Arousals in Sleep

Repository for bachelor thesis on Automatic Multi-Modal Detection of Autonomic Arousals in Sleep. The thesis itself and all related data is confidential and thus not publicly available, but access to the thesis can be granted upon request.

Abstract:

Manual scoring of arousals is a tiring process prone to high inter-scorerdisagreement. Current arousal detection is based on electroencephalog-raphy (EEG), which is not suitable for sleep studies at home. Basner etal. (2008) proposes a semi-automatic detection algorithm based on elec-trocardiography (ECG) and acknowledges that it cannot replace EEG,but a strong correlation between cortical and autonomic arousals is ev-ident.This study explores the possibility of better autonomic arousal detec-tion algorithms in a multi-modal setting by inclusion of features fromphotoplethysmography (PPG).A state-of-the-art algorithm provided by M. Olsen (2018) is applied forreliable RR-tachogram extraction in ECG signals, and a pulse peak de-tection algorithm is developed for extraction of pulse transit time andcorresponding pulse wave amplitude in PPG signals.Classification is performed by a recurrent neural network (RNN) utilis-ing gated recurrent unit (GRU) cells with an architecture derived frommodel- and feature selection using 2-layered cross-validation on theMulti-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA) data-set.It was found that the best performing model was a 2-layered bi-directionalRNN using GRU cells, and cross-validation shows slight performanceincrease when introducing PTT and PWA to a RR-interval based model.The best performing modality in this study was an RR-interval calcu-lated at800Hz upsampling.A generalisation estimation is performed on a sub-set of an additionaldata-set, Sleep Heart Health Study (SHHS), in order to provide unbi-ased results for comparison to other studies.  A sensitivity of58.53%,precision of71.68%, F1-score of0.6444and a correlation between scoredand predicted arousal indices of (R=0.762, p <0.01) was found.These results compare well to state-of-the-art research but with a useof far less features. It was found that the model performed poorly onsubjects with abnormal heart rates, suggesting ECG-based algorithmcannot reliably be employed unless deployed multi-modally.
